Visualizing food security in Canada’s north 


2.1 Defining key players; terminology and scope ◼
Let’s preface the investigation with a brief introduction of key terminology. Food security and insecurity are global conditions; this project works within the Canadian context of key terms in order to focus the scope of the food insecurity through a Canadian lens. Canada defines food insecurity by the definition given by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations; in order for food security to exist, “all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life” (United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (1996), Rome Declaration on World Food Security, World Food Summit Plan of Action, paragraph 1, Rome: November 1996. Available at: http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/w3613e/w3613e00.htm). Food insecurity therefore exists when this standard is not met. Health Canada categorizes the phenomenon into moderate food insecurity, occurring when “the quality and/or quantity of food consumed were inadequate,” and severe food insecurity, occurring when an individual “reduced their food intake and/or experienced disrupted eating patterns” (http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-624-x/2015001/article/14138-eng.htm#n1). The term food insecurity will henceforth encompass both moderate and severe food insecurity unless otherwise noted.  
For the purposes of this study, the ‘Canadian North’ refers to Canada’s three territories: Yukon, Northwest Territories and Nunavut. Although the 60th parallel is the mainland boundary between the territories and four of the western provinces, there are geographical areas of the territories which dip below this latitude and therefore the popular phrase ‘north of 60’ is not consistent with this investigation. Regions of the global circumpolar north can be categorized into four basic levels health status, based on health indicators and differences between northern and southern, and indigenous and non-indigenous residents (AHDR, 302). Canada’s north is divided between two of these categories. Following the Nordic countries, which rank highest, the Yukon and the Northwest Territories (along with Alaska) have health statuses comparable to the Canadian national average but significant differences between indigenous and non-indigenous populations. Nunavut (along with Greenland) has a predominantly indigenous population and a large gap in health status compared to the national average, and ranks just above the Russian Arctic. Through the Canadian Constitution (1982), the indigenous people of Canada are legally referred to as the Aboriginal Peoples, and specified as including three groups: Indian, Inuit and Métis (Peoples and cultures of the Circumpolar north, 13). 
2.2 Contextualization and framing on Northern food insecurity within life and culture in Canada’s North ◼
The current landscape of food insecurity in Northern Canada has emerged from an amalgamation of local determinants and external stresses (FTF) over recent decades. The integrated nature of this multi-faceted phenomenon must be broken down into its contributing components, in order to offer a contextualized and well-framed presentation of the current status of the issue before considering strategic solutions. Also at stake are the implications of food security, in both a general sense, and specific to residents of Northern Canada. The following discussion highlights the major factors that have been at play in the shaping of the current nature of food insecurity in Northern Canada; namely globalization and environmental changes, as well as the distinct factors that stem from them, and the related implications. 
2.2.1 Development and change over time; why/how has this affected food security, what patterns have been recognized; globalization, climate change as catalyst for social and economic change (historical determinants of food insecurity) ◼
Once associated mainly with transient mining communities, Canada’s north has evolved into a vibrant and increasingly significant part of the nation’s social and economic spheres. The forces behind this transition most notably include “climate change and industrial development” which “continue to impact northern ecosystems and communities” (AFS, 2) in both beneficial and detrimental ways. While increased development brings modern opportunities north, a strain is felt on rural communities as youth are drawn away from traditional livelihoods to the new possibilities of the city. Modern issues associated with the recent financial and economic downturn are also prevalent in the newly developing noth. The gap between those living in poor versus upper and middle income segments has been widening across Canada, but particularly in the north (RTF). Increasing commercialization puts pressure on traditionally financially unimpeded activities. As a people tied closely to nature living in an especially vulnerable landscape, climate change can have detrimental effects on northern Aboriginal populations. Climate change acts as “a major factor in the deteriorating food and water security situation in the Arctic” (AHDR, 308) causing reduced ice coverage, changing migratory patterns of wildlife, difficulties in transportation and food storage, and a compromised opportunity for traditional hunting and gathering. As powerful catalysts for change, northern urbanization and the changing climate act as external stresses on local determinants; creating “socioeconomic and environmental changes… [putting] new groups at risk of marginalization” (ADHR, 308). The specific local determinants of food insecurity stemming from these overarching forces are important to study independently and in combination to determine where vulnerability exists, and where the opportunities for intervention are. 
2.2.2 Human rights issue and public health problem; implications of food insecurity ◼
Recently deemed “a serious public health problem” (HFI, 6) as well as an issue of human rights (AFS), the implications of food insecurity on Canada’s North are felt in both the health and cultural well-being of its residents. In order to strategize for future prevention, a holistic approach must be taken to address the “pattern of vulnerability” (HFI, 12) which mark groups living across the north.
	2.2.2.1 Implications on physical and mental well-being for adults, children ◼
Households affected by food insecurity range from unattached adults to families with multiple children. It is important to note that while compromised access to food has staggering effects on any affected individual, there are also effects distinct to each age group. In general, food insecure individuals experience less than average health, development of chronic conditions, reduced ability to perform daily tasks due to health conditions, depression and a “perceived lack of social support” (http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-624-x/2015001/article/14138-eng.htm#n1). When faced with food insecurity, adults caring for children often compromise their own well-being by reducing their food consumption to mask the severity of the situation from their children and to ensure adequate nutrition for other family members. Chronic conditions such as high blood pressure, obesity and diabetes are often consequences of this reduction in healthy eating; the management of which in turn may become stressed due to further compromised nutrition. Children experiencing food insecurity may not be ensured the variety and quantity of nutrients recognized with ensuring health development and growth. As for adults, the deficiencies in vitamins and minerals faced by food insecure children can lead to chronic disease, obesity and developmental issues. 
Aboriginal populations in Northern Canada have historically survived off of, or supplemented a store bought diet with ‘country foods’. Country foods, also called traditional foods, “derived from hunting and fishing are important components of the food systems, and [can] include ringed seal, caribou, Arctic char, walrus, beluga whale, and narwhal, and a variety of wild berries” (FTF, 46) depending on geographic location and seasonal patterns. Many factors—discussed in the following sections—have lead to a dietary transition among northern Aboriginal people in recent years; characterized by a shift “from ‘traditional’ foods based on hunting and fishing to a ‘western’ type of diet” (AHDR, 311). The recent dependence on store bought foods consistent with a ‘western’ diet have also brought ‘western’ type health problems typically not common among Aboriginals maintaining a country diet, including those mentioned above; obesity, diabetes and other chronic diseases. Beyond these more typical health implications are the implications on the well-being of cultural identity. Northern Aboriginal peoples associate the act of living off the land, as well as the consumption of collected country foods, as “components of well-being” that are “vital to many household’s well-being and cultural identity” (AHDR, 434). As dietary transitions take place, this identifying component of well-being may experience a correlated downturn. The determinant factors of this dietary transition in the north are worth noting in order to contextualize the phenomenon and highlight the need for the preservation of northern Aboriginal traditions.
	2.2.2.2 Preservation of Aboriginal traditions; discuss role of education/knowledge of food prep and healthy eating, promotion of traditional hunting and harvesting activities as a method to overcome food insecurity challenges (TFS 3). Highlight generational nature of determinants. ◼
In a quickly developing world, adapting cultural traditions is difficult. The combined effects of social, environmental and economic factors over the past 50 years has lead to a decline in passing-down and implementation of cultural knowledge. This determinant of food insecurity is inherently generational in nature; Aboriginal peoples have had a long history of passing down cultural insights from generation to generation in order to preserve traditions essential to their cultural and functional identity. Canadian Aboriginal people have historically been recipients of repugnant acts of social and cultural abuse and neglect, creating “intergenerational consequences, many of which have critically impacted the social and cultural fabric of Aboriginal communities’ identities” (AFS, 3). These marginalizing experiences have left many groups vulnerable to the negative side of urbanization and climate change previously discussed. Development in northern communities has introduced a proliferation of market foods to the typically traditional diets of residents. As commercialization of hunting practice has left Aboriginal hunter gatherers grappling with the increasing cost of necessary equipment, many families must rely more heavily on market food to supplement their diet. In addition, changing climates and geographical features has caused migratory shifts in the wildlife typically hunted as country food. These factors, along with changing tastes among younger generations, are contributing to the recent decline in “harvesting activities and the consumption of country food” (TFS, 4) among northern Aboriginal communities. Even if families do possess the traditional skills and knowledge, they “may not have the funds to purchase equipment for hunting or cookware to make nutritious meals” (TFS, 5). Notoriously high market food costs in remote northern communities often causes financially challenged families to choose less expensive, and typically less nutritious, options when highly nutritious country food are inaccessible (RTF). Preventative initiatives are therefore focusing on “the necessary life skills and knowledge, such as food storage, preparation, and acquisition” (TFS,4)  in regards to not only country food, but market food. Education and knowledge of life skills essential to ensuring food security are now being introduced in northern schools and communities through strategic initiatives and policy. Successful initiatives include the Core Recipe Project, Aullak, Sangilivallianginnatuk, and the Northern Farm Training Institute (NFTI). The key to the success of such programs include the consideration of “local food culture and the ways in which people manage food in their community” (TFS, 4) and the continuation of intergenerational passing of cultural knowledge, which has the momentum to be carried forward into future prevention (TSF). Involvement of organizations or government at any level of jurisdiction must work collaboratively with each uniquely affected community in order “to avoid the imposition of rules, frameworks, and discourses that may limit the ability of local actors to engage proactively” (AHDR, 451) with these initiatives. 
2.2.3 Role of regulations and governance ◼
Legal regulations and policy are important actors in the establishment and sustainment of food security among Canadians. In his visit to Canada in 2012, the United Nation’s Special Rapporteur on the right to food made several important observations regarding the current legal and policy frameworks and their relation to the current food security situation (RTF). These observations stated that due to the absence of a constitutional right to food “Canada would benefit from a national right to food strategy” (RTF, 7). While this gap in overarching legal framework is important to note, this investigation will hereon focus on specific rules and regulations that can be attributed to specific determinants or implications of food insecurity. 
It has been made clear through many sources that preservation of Aboriginal traditions is key to combating northern food security. The promotion of traditional knowledge and action around local food systems through the support governing organizations allows for communities to gain food sovereignty; an essential achievement towards food security. Food sovereignty is defined by Food Secure Canada as the “right of peoples to healthy and culturally appropriate food produced through ecologically sound and sustainable methods, and their right to define their own food and agriculture systems.” One way of promoting successful local food systems in northern Canada is by ensuring that local hunters and gatherers have adequate access to the land (RTF). Due to historically recognized ties to the land, Aboriginal peoples generally have “broader rights to natural resources under international human rights law” (RTF, 18) including using natural resources for the continuation and support of their cultural identity through hunting, fishing and agricultural activities. However, “many Aboriginal communities [have] expressed concerns regarding federal government policies that have disrupted and, in some cases, devastated the traditional practices of indigenous people, including through removing control over land and natural resources” (RTF, 19) . It is therefore paramount that with the continued effects of globalization and environmental change outlined above, Aboriginal peoples of the north are allowed continued and sufficient access to land. Collaboration between local participants and government officials “[is] needed to avoid the imposition of rules, frameworks, and discourses that may limit the ability of local actors to engage proactively with change on their own terms” (AHDR, 451)
2.2.4 State of awareness; recent rise in attention to issue, reporting and initiatives undertaken - discuss gap in techniques where visualization could aid the solution; promote collaboration across all stakeholders ◼
Food insecurity requires a holistic solution in order to successfully address all issues at play. Holistic refers here not only to identifying and addressing all determinants of food insecurity and the intersections between them, but also the involvement of a range of groups with the appropriate knowledge, influence and means to strategize and carry out remedial action. Necessary involvement should be expected from stakeholders including federal, territorial and municipal governments, non-government organizations and initiatives, as well as individuals and groups within affected areas. Collaboration between these groups is necessary to avoid Southern or Western biases by linking theory and practice with local participants (Collaborative research in northern communities). Much progress has already been made in this area, with numerous organizations monitoring and reporting annual statistics, and strategically implementing measures for future prevention. However, despite the range of measures recently being taken, there is a recognizable gap in the visual presentation of statistics and information regarding food insecurity. As a highly accessible form of presenting information, a visual (as opposed to textual or verbal) method of communicating relevant data and information would allow for a baseline of knowledge to be shared across all stakeholders; from government officials to affected northern residents. Shared knowledge promotes the collaboratory atmosphere so integral to the success of food security initiatives. It is also important to note the engaging characteristics of visualizations. Visual presentations of data have become exponentially more present in the media over recent years, likely due to engaging aesthetics and the ability to synthesize complex datasets to highlight key patterns. Although “the food security crisis in northern Canada has become the focus of a public discussion, advocacy and action at the national and regional levels” (TFS, v), the visual presentation of the situation may catch the attention of influential organizations that are not currently involved but wish to be. The channels of dissemination for a digital visualization can allow widespread sharing of knowledge that other forms of information may not be accessible through. The following summary of the data available for visual communication will present the foundation for the visualization.
2.3 Discussion of determinants
2.3.1 Determinants for which quantitative data is available: level of food insecurity in relation to income, household size/type, age and gender, cost of market food (food prices, transportation costs, inventory and storage costs, brick and mortar costs), poverty (unemployment, dwelling type versus occupants), cost of access to country food, globalization including population growth and commercialization of hunting practices
Lkjshakh
2.3.2 Determinants for which qualitative data is available: regulations (access to land), transportation, culture and traditional practices
Lkjshakh
2.4 Discussion of implications
2.4.1 Implications for which quantitative data is available: health indicators, 
Lkjshakh
2.4.2 Implications for which qualitative data is available
Lkjshakh


